To do, or to make in Spanish is hacer. And it has a silent h.
It's h-a-c-e-r.
So in most of Spain actually that would sound ha/th/er. But ha/s/er in most of the Spanish speaking world.
What verb type is it?
What is the ending?
-er.
So actually whenever we come across a new verb, we want to make a mental note what is the ending.
Or, rather than make a mental note, just process it.
Remember we always want to do anything but memorize,
so just looking and going "hacer, -er verb, ok". Just to get in that habit.
If we know it's an -er verb, we know how to work with it.
So how would you say he's doing or making, she is doing or making, you are (formal) doing or making?
Hace.
Good.
You're doing it:
Lo hace.
How would you say they're doing it or you guys are doing it?
Los hacen.
Lo hacen.
Very good.
You (informal) are doing it. So what is the sound for informal you?
Hacen.
So for informal you we add on an s to the he/she/it version.
So we get:
Haces.
You're doing it:
Lo haces.
Good.
The word for what in Spanish is qué.
How do you say what are you doing?
¿Qué haces?
¿Qué haces? And this is a way of saying how are you as well.
what are you doing?,
what are you up to?
Good.
So we see that for -ar verbs, we have the principle sound of /a/, and then we add our n or s, n for they or you (plural), and s for informal you.
And for -er/-ir verbs we have the key sound /e/, and we're adding on s for informal you, n for they, you (plural).
Now these associations
between s and informal you, and n and they or you guys, we're going to see all throughout the Spanish verb structure.
So this confuses me a little bit;
isn't this also a memorization?
Having to remember which ending goes with what people?
There's a difference between memorization and remembering, ah?
We can remember through not actively trying to memorize.
So not telling you you shouldn't remember anything, you need to remember Spanish.
I'm telling you that you're going to remember it much easier without the active process of trying to memorize anything, which blocks whichever processes we need for remembering.
I like to describe it in this way: that you borrow information when you memorize it,
but when you are applying it practically in this construction of these sentences, when you're looking from many different angles
at the elements that we are looking at in Spanish, then you are internalizing it.
Then it's really yours, you're not borrowing it.
Puedo in Spanish means I can, I am able.
Puedo.
Good.
P-u-e-d-o.
Puedo.
You're probably noticing as well that the d is quite soft when it comes in the middle of a word in Spanish, rather than a hard /d/.
So puedo means I can, or I am able, and the "to" form of the verb is an -er verb.
So puedo is an -er verb.
So how would you say he can or she can or it can or you (formal) can?
Puede.
And how would you say informally you can?
Puedes.
Good.
Now in English, we don't say can you to come?, but it's what we mean.
Now this is an English problem;
the English is taking the to away here;
it does it sometimes.
You don't say I must to come,
you say I must come,
no?
I am able to come.
You can think of it this way as we thought of I must come as I owe to come.
So how would you say can you come? Talking informally?
Puede - sorry, informal. ¿Puedes venir?
¿Puedes venir?
So this is what we're going to be using to talk with friends,
no, this s. We're going to be hearing it a lot.
If it helps you make the association, you might have heard ¿cómo estás?,
how are you?
The s on the end of estás there is this informal s.
Puedes.
So, can't you come?:
¿No puedes venir?
¿No puedes venir? Why can't you come?:
¿Por qué no puedes venir?
¿Por qué no puedes venir? I want to know why you can't come:
Quiero -
oh to know.
Ok I'm going know and knowledge and that's not taking me anywhere.
Boy's got savvy…
Ah, yes.
So I want to know:
Quiero saber.
Quiero saber. Why:
Por qué.
You can't come:
No puedes venir.
Very good.
If you address each part, part by part, and apply all of our mental energy just to the part we need and then forget it.
Quiero saber por qué no puedes venir.
Very good.
So to recap, we have -ar verbs and we have -er/-ir verbs.
For all of the verbs, we take off the ending, -ar, -er, -ir, and we put -o for the "I" version.
So vender is to sell and I sell is:
Vendo.
Vendo. Comprar is to buy and I buy is:
Compro.
Compro. Good. Llegar is to arrive. Llegar. And I arrive is:
Llegaro...
oh llego.
Good.
So with this rule we can take any verb and we can do this
if it's regular. Maybe it's irregular and we try it and we make a mistake.
So for example, salir is to leave or to go out.
If we apply this rule, what are we going to come up with?
Salo.
But it's wrong;
it's salgo.
So it's one of those -go instead of -o like vengo, I'm coming: Tengo. Tengo, I have; salgo, I leave, I'm going out.
The quite common verbs,
we tend to find in all languages that the most common verbs are the most irregular.
Esperar, esperar, means to wait and to hope.
Which is interesting and it's accurate enough.
I mean you're not doing much more than waiting when you hope.
We have it in the word desperate actually.
Des- is un-, and you're hopeless when you're desperate.
So esperar is to wait or to hope.
How do you say I'm waiting, or I'm hoping, or I wait, or I hope?
Espero.
Now how do you say he waits?
Espere.
I'm really glad you made that mistake actually. Because it's a wonderful point to elaborate on.
Before we touch a verb, we want to take one split-second to go esperar: -ar verb.
Otherwise what happens?
Our brain hears /e/-/e/ from esperar, and it wants to put an /e/.
What your mind is doing there, putting an e because you have espe- and it fits better, is actually even ingrained in other languages. For example, in Turkish you have something called vowel harmony.
And when you're adding on suffixes, there's like
two or four, depending on the suffix, two or four different versions of that suffix that you can add on so it can agree with the vowel before.
So there's something in your mind that would prefer an e there.
Of course because it's espe-
and like I said you even see this formalized in other languages, like in this phenomenon of vowel harmony.
So to stop that process from happening, you must run back to the "to" form and then you take control.
Espera.
And espera means he/she/it/you (formal) wait or are waiting, is waiting.
We can build the rest.
So how do you say they wait?
Esperan.
If you want to say they're waiting for me, we don't need the word for for,
it's just like they await me.
We don't need the word for for.
So how do you say they await me?
Esperanme - sorry, me esperan.
The only option there because it's a changed verb. Me esperan.
They're not waiting for me:
No me esperan.
Good. No me esperan. I want to know why they're not waiting for me. I want to know:
Quiero saber.
Why:
Por qué no me esperan.
Very good. Quiero saber por qué no me esperan. Well done.
I was just very happy that I remembered saver finally.
Ah good. Saber though with a b.
Saber, ah.
Good.
Isn't it from savvy?
Yeah there is a grey area between v and b.
So it will change between languages.
Actually a very nice example of this is the word for vocabulary.
Vocabulary in Spanish is vocabulario.
Vocabulario. It's spelled with a v.
But the word for mouth in Spanish is boca, spelled with a b.
Now of course vocabulario is coming from boca.
Your vocabulary is your "mouth-ulary".
This gives us another rule, actually.
Words ending -ary will become -ario.
So necessary:
Necesario.
Contrary:
Contrario.
Good.